docs: #1425 update tls encryption docs (#1472)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/manage/security/encryption.mdx

---

> title: Configure Encryption

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this is mentioned anywhere in the docs, but it should be that if you setup a TLS listener for the Kafka API, you'll need to add the `pandaproxy_client::broker_tls` and `schema_registry_client::broker_tls` in order to utilize it.

- mTLS, or 2-way TLS, is a protocol that authenticates both the server and the client. In addition to the server certificate required in TLS, mTLS also requires the client to give a certificate. This involves more overhead to implement, but it can be useful for environments that require additional security and only have a small number of verified clients.

## Prerequisites

TLS certificates are necessary for encryption. You can use your own certificates, either self-signed or issued by a trusted certificate authority (CA).

### Create certificate signing requests

This step creates the certificate signing request for the CA to extend trust over the broker's certificates.

For each Redpanda broker, you specify the key file (`broker.key`), the certificate file (`broker.crt`), and the truststore file (`ca.crt`). Each broker has its own `broker.key` and `broker.crt`, but all brokers can have the same `ca.crt`.

:::note
If you're using self-signed certificates, you must also [create a local CA for self-signed certificates](../../security/encryption#create-a-local-ca-for-self-signed-certificates).
:::

#### 1. Create broker configuration file (broker.cnf)

> Depending on the address the client uses to connect to Redpanda, you might need to create a CNF file for each broker to modify the `alt_names` section with organizational details. For production usage, edit the `distinguished_name` section with DNS resolutions and the IP address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the address the client uses to connect to Redpanda, you might need to create a CNF file for each broker to modify the `alt_names` section with organizational details. For production usage, edit the `alt_names` section with DNS resolutions and/or the IP addresses.
```

Reviewer: I think it is important to note here that a correct SAN is required when using `rpk`.  After some experimentation, if you don't provide correct entries in the SAN, `rpk` will fail with some of the following errors:

```
# If the IP address isn't right
unable to dial: x509: certificate is valid for 127.0.0.1, not 127.0.1.2
# If you access the broker via an IP address but one isn't provided in the SA
unable to dial: x509: cannot validate certificate for 127.0.1.2 because it doesn't contain any IP SANs
```

By default, Redpanda data is sent unencrypted. A security best practice is to enable encryption with TLS or mTLS. 

- Transport Layer Security (TLS), previously SSL, provides encryption for client-server communication. A server certificate prevents third parties from accessing data transferred between the client and server.
- mTLS, or 2-way TLS, is a protocol that authenticates both the server and the client. In addition to the server certificate required in TLS, mTLS also requires the client to give a certificate. This involves more overhead to implement, but it can be useful for environments that require additional security and only have a small number of verified clients.

> For each Redpanda broker, you specify the key file (`broker.key`), the certificate file (`broker.crt`), and the truststore file (`ca.crt`). Each broker has its own `broker.key` and `broker.crt`, but all brokers can have the same `ca.crt`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each Redpanda broker, specify the key file (`broker.key`), the certificate file (`broker.crt`), and the truststore file (`ca.crt`). Each broker has its own `broker.key` and `broker.crt`, but all brokers can have the same `ca.crt`.
```

Author: fixed

- mTLS, or 2-way TLS, is a protocol that authenticates both the server and the client. In addition to the server certificate required in TLS, mTLS also requires the client to give a certificate. This involves more overhead to implement, but it can be useful for environments that require additional security and only have a small number of verified clients.

## Prerequisites

TLS certificates are necessary for encryption. You can use your own certificates, either self-signed or issued by a trusted certificate authority (CA).

### Create certificate signing requests

This step creates the certificate signing request for the CA to extend trust over the broker's certificates.

For each Redpanda broker, you specify the key file (`broker.key`), the certificate file (`broker.crt`), and the truststore file (`ca.crt`). Each broker has its own `broker.key` and `broker.crt`, but all brokers can have the same `ca.crt`.

:::note
If you're using self-signed certificates, you must also [create a local CA for self-signed certificates](../../security/encryption#create-a-local-ca-for-self-signed-certificates).

> :::

Reviewer: I think this note can be removed

### Optional: Create a local CA for self-signed certificates

For some environments, or for testing, you may want to create a local CA. 

> #### 1. Create the CA configuration file (ca.cnf)

Author: @hcoyote when you review this, please check the node.cnf vs ca.cnf in this section. I think we should add a note that the certificate and the key must match, but I'm confused by both of them here..

Reviewer 2: @micheleRP I see that he approved--did you get what you need/is this issue resolved?

Author: not yet. @hcoyote you're still planning to review this week, right?

Reviewer 3: Ok, read through this. And with the context of the original request, I wonder if the user who ran into this mixed the  certificate of the CA with the key of the node when they were doing setup. 

In the context of this page, we'll have two sets of conf files, keys, and certificates. The first set will be the ca.cnf, ca.key, and ca.crt. This creates the root of the web of trust. And for each broker node, you'll have a node.cnf, node.key, and node.crt. Additionally, if you're going to have the CA extend trust over the node's certificate, you'll have the certificate signing request (node.csr).

So the process is something like this, if you're using the self-managed CA

1. create the CA. generates ca.key and ca.crt.
2. create the node key. generates node.key
3. create the node certificate signing request. generates node.csr
4. sign the csr with the CA key, which creates the node certificate. generates node.crt

If you're _not_ using the self-managed CA, the process is basically the same. Except, you have a pre-existing CA managed by someone else. You do steps 2 and 3. They do step 4 and hand you back a TLS certificate for the node.

So, when configuring each redpanda broker, you specify the key_file=node.key, cert_file=node.crt, and truststore_file=ca.crt.

For example, if you had 3 brokers, you'd have every node configured with the same truststore_file (ca.crt). Each node would have it's own node.key and node.crt.

and you can get fancy using subject alternative names with a single version of node.key/node.crt  if you have your node.cnf appropriately configured (you touch on this somewhat in the full doc) with the section of node.cnf that looks like this:

```
subjectAltName   = @alt_names

[ alt_names ]
DNS.1 = localhost
DNS.2 = redpanda
DNS.3 = console
DNS.4 = connect
IP.1  = 127.0.0.1
```

You'd make that alt_names list look something like this though:

```
[ alt_names ]
DNS.1 = broker1.example.com
DNS.2 = broker2.example.com
DNS.3 = broker3.example.com
```

The challenge with using SANs is that there's a practical limit to how many host names you can stick in there. And adding/deleting entries means you have to update the certificate across all brokers in the cluster whenever you added/changed/deleted an entry. Which method you choose depends entirely on how difficult it is to manage certificate changes.

Author: Thanks Travis! Please review this updated section, especially the part about alt_names!

extendedKeyUsage = serverAuth,clientAuth
```

### Create a local CA for self-signed certificates

:::note

> This step is only required if you're using self-signed certificates. 

Reviewer: I don't believe this is correct.  You'd want a CA if you want to generate multiple certificates all signed by the same root.  This would be required if the operator wants to use mTLS but issue different certificates to multiple Redpanda brokers, clients, etc.

You can generate a self-signed certificate in a single `openssl` command:

`openssl req -new -newkey rsa:4096 -days 365 -nodes -x509 -keyout broker.key -out broker.crt -subj "/CN=redpanda" -addext "subjectAltName = DNS:localhost, IP: 127.0.0.1"`

Author: Thanks @michael-redpanda! Please confirm this update: https://deploy-preview-1472--redpanda-documentation.netlify.app/docs/manage/security/encryption/#create-a-local-ca-for-self-signed-certificates

:::

#### 1. Create CA configuration file (ca.cnf)

> Edit the `distinguished_name` section with your own organization details.

Reviewer: github won't allow me to comment on a non-changed line, but below on line 134 `default_md = sha256`, would it be possible to note that this is the minimum message digest level?  `sha1` isn't allowed as it isn't considered secure.

> 

Reviewer: In the example configuration file above, we should mention the use of SAN.

Under the `[ extensions ]` section add `subjectAltName = @alt_names` and then underneath add:

```
[ alt_names ]
DNS.1 = localhost
IP.1 = 127.0.0.1
```

It should also point out that the SAN must be accurate for the broker this certificate will be installed to.
